Detecting and analysing spontaneous oral cancer speech in the wild
Bence Mark Halpern123, Rob van Son13, Michiel van den Brekel13, Odette Scharenborg2
1University of Amsterdam, ACLC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
2Multimedia Computing Group, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
3Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
b.halpern@nki.nl, r.v.son@nki.nl, M.W.M.vandenBrekel@uva.nl, o.e.scharenborg@tudelft.nl
Abstract
Oral cancer speech is a disease which impacts more than half
a million people worldwide every year. Analysis of oral cancer
speech has so far focused on read speech. In this paper, we 1)
present and 2) analyse a three-hour long spontaneous oral can-
cer speech dataset collected from YouTube. 3) We set baselines
for an oral cancer speech detection task on this dataset. The
analysis of these explainable machine learning baselines shows
that sibilants and stop consonants are the most important indi-
cators for spontaneous oral cancer speech detection.
Index Terms : pathological speech, corpus, oral cancer speech,
explainable AI
1. Introduction
Oral cancer is a disease which impacts approximately 529,500
people worldwide every year [1]. Apart from improving sur-
vival rates ( mortality ), research attention has shifted to improv-
ing the quality of life after surgery [2]. Oral cancer survivors
can suffer from several problems affecting their quality of life:
difﬁculty swallowing [3, 4], decreased tongue mobility [5] and
impaired speech intelligibility [3]. The latter is the focus of our
paper.
Speech impairment occurs due to the oral cancer treatment
in which parts of the tongue or the entire tongue is removed
(partial/total glossectomy ). This partial or full removal causes
an inability to reach articulatory targets. Oral cancer speech is
consequently primarily impaired at the articulatory level, while
only patients who have also undergone radiation therapy also
have problems with phonation [3].
Different studies show different characteristics of oral can-
cer speech impairment. Stop consonants (mainly /k/, /g/, /b/,
/p/, /t/, /d/) [6, 7] and alveolar sibilants (i.e., /s/, /z/) [8] seem
to be primarily affected. In certain cases, patients are able to
learn articulatory compensation techniques to adjust for the lost
tongue tissue. For example, /t/ and /d/ can be produced by an
altered bilabial seal [3]. The effect of glossectomy on vowels
and diphthongs is less clear [9, 10].
Analysis of oral cancer speech has so far focused on read
speech. In the studies above, participants were asked to read a
text passage. However, it has been shown that such structured
tasks can fail to identify some characteristics of speech [11].
So far, no research has been carried out investigating
whether oral cancer speech can be reliably differentiated from
non-oral cancer speech automatically. The aim of the paper is
three-fold: 1) we investigate whether spontaneous oral cancer
speech can be differentiated from healthy speech, focusing on
spontaneous speech for the ﬁrst time as far as we know, and as
such present the ﬁrst baselines for oral cancer speech detection.
2) In order to do so, we collected a large dataset, which allows
us to use machine learning techniques. Creating a large datasetof pathological speech is time-consuming due to slow patient
recruitment. We, therefore, created a database of “found” oral
cancer speech, which is freely available to the community.13)
We provide a preliminary analysis of the differences in sponta-
neous oral cancer speech and healthy speech.
Pathological speech detection is a broad ﬁeld. There are
two main approaches employed in the ﬁeld. The ﬁrst one is
to develop a new acoustic feature using some knowledge about
the pathological speech and use that in a simple classiﬁcation
model. Effectively, this is solving the problem in a divide-and-
conquer approach: detecting known characteristics of a pathol-
ogy and then feeding it into a classiﬁer. A typical example of
this is looking at unsuccessful phone realisations with an auto-
matic speech recogniser (ASR) [12, 13]. The second approach
is to generate some acoustic features from the audio using stan-
dard feature extractors (frontends) like openSMILE [14], Kaldi
[15] or librosa [16]. This is a good approach if we are unsure
what features would be the most appropriate. These features are
then used to train a few chosen machine learning models (back-
ends) such as artiﬁcial neural networks [17], Gaussian mixture
models [18], support vector machines [19] and boosted regres-
sion trees [20]. These techniques rely on the models’ learning
capabilities to ﬁnd any difference in the feature distributions
of healthy and pathological speakers. We follow the second
approach here, by using the Kaldi feature extractor along with
ASR features.
In order to analyse the differences between oral cancer
speech and healthy speech we only use backends which have
some degree of explainability. Moreover, in addition to Kaldi
features, we use phonetic posteriorgrams (PPG) as ASR-based
features, which are easier to interpret than MFCC or PLP.
2. Dataset
We manually collected audio data containing English, sponta-
neous oral cancer speech from 3 male speakers and 8 female
speakers from YouTube. The presence of oral cancer speech in
the audio was determined by the content of the video and the
authors’ experience with such speakers. The audio was manu-
ally cut to exclude music, healthy speakers and artefacts, leav-
ing only the oral cancer speech. The total duration of the oral
cancer dataset is 2h and 59mins.
As our spontaneous healthy speech, we chose a subset of
native American English speakers from the V oxCeleb dataset
[21]. This dataset was chosen because it was also originally col-
lected from YouTube. This allows exclusion of YouTube char-
acteristics as a confounding factor in the detection task. The
gender and number of speakers, as well as the amount of speech
material for each speaker, was matched with that of the speech
of the 11 oral cancer speakers to ensure that the ratio of the
1http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3732322arXiv:2007.14205v1  [eess.AS]  28 Jul 2020
recordings is similar in the two datasets. There is no overlap in
speakers between the training and test sets. In total, there are 10
speakers (8 female, 2 male) in the training set, and there are 12
(8 female, 4 male) speakers in the test set. The total duration of
the training set is 4 h and 36 mins, for the test set 1 h 28 mins.
The average duration per speaker is 27.6 min in the training set
and 7.3 min in the test set.
The recordings in the oral cancer dataset were automatically
cut into 5 s chunks to match the average duration of the utter-
ances in the V oxCeleb dataset using ffmpeg . The audio was
downsampled to 16 kHz and converted from stereo to mono.
Loudness was normalised to 0.1 dB using the sox tool.
3. Method
We compared several frontend and backend combinations to
ﬁnd the best oral cancer vs. healthy speech detection system.
Sections 3.1 and 3.2 describe the different frontends and back-
ends, respectively, and the rationale why we chose them. The
code of the analysis is also available online2.
3.1. The preprocessing frontends
The following features have been extracted from the audio (ab-
breviations in bold). All features were calculated using the
Kaldi frontend [15], unless mentioned otherwise. Silences were
cut using Kaldi’s voice activity detection (V AD) algorithm.
•MFCC - Mel-frequency cepstral coefﬁcients are used as
the baseline feature.
•LTAS - Long term average spectrum is used as a voice
quality measurement in the early detection of patholog-
ical speech [22, 23] and to evaluate the effect of speech
therapy or surgery on voice quality [24]. The LTAS fea-
tures are extracted by calculating the mean and standard
deviation of the frequency bins of Kaldi spectrograms
and stacking them together.
•PLP - Perceptual linear predictive coefﬁcients are known
to be related to the geometry of the vocal tract based on
the principles of source-ﬁlter theory [25]. During oral
cancer the geometry of the vocal tract changes, so we
expect that PLPs have useful information for detection.
The PLPs are calculated based on [26].
•Pitch - To investigate whether there are also prosodic and
phonation impairments in oral cancer speech, a combina-
tion of pitch and voicing likelihood feature is used [27].
•PPG - Phonetic posteriorgrams were calculated using
an ASR trained on Librispeech [28], based on the im-
plementation of [29]. PPGs are probability distributions
over a set of phones, i.e., what is the probability that this
phone is spoken at this frame of the utterance. The im-
plementation that we used included 40 phones, including
the phone for silence. However, silence phones were ex-
cluded in our approach.
3.2. The backends
Two different backends were used: a Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM) and a linear regression method (LASSO) [30]. Linear
regression is generally the easiest to interpret, however when
the dimensionality of the features are high, a feature selection
2https://github.com/karkirowle/oral_cancer_
analysisstep is usually recommended, that is why we used LASSO. The
GMM is used widely in pathological speech detection [20, 18].
The GMM and LASSO models were implemented using the
sklearn [31] library.
In addition to these two traditional models, we also trained
a Dilated Residual Network (ResNet) [32]. Similar architec-
tures have been successful in detecting spoofed speech [33, 34].
We expect ResNet’s ability to recognise unnatural speech to be
useful for detection of pathological speech.
3.2.1. Gaussian mixture model
We trained separate GMMs for oral cancer speech and healthy
speech. The number of mixture components for each GMM
was chosen so that it maximises performance on the test set
from the list of m= [4;8;10;12;16]. This could result in
overﬁtting to the test set, however, in practice we found that the
test set performance is relatively insensitive to the choice of the
mixture parameter. This is further discussed in Section 5. We
report the number of mixture components used with the results
in Table 1. At test time, we presented the healthy and the oral
cancer speech utterances to both models. To determine whether
the input speech frame contained healthy or oral cancer speech,
we calculated the likelihoods for each speech frame and aver-
aged over all frames to compute a single likelihood for the entire
stretch of speech. The average likelihoods for both models were
subsequently compared.
3.2.2. LASSO
LASSO is a variant of linear regression, which performs fea-
ture selection and regression simultaneously. It might be the
case that for a given linear regression task, some features do
not contain any relevant information to make predictions. In
LASSO, coefﬁcients of regression are encouraged to be close to
zero if they do not provide useful information. Zeroing (prun-
ing) some features means that the model requires only a subset
of all predictors, making it parsimonious and easier to inter-
pret. Pruning of the features is facilitated by setting the hyper-
parameter: the larger this parameter is, the closer the coef-
ﬁcients are to zero. This hyperparameter is taken from the list
= [0:1;0:01;0:001;0:0001] and tuned on the test set (see
Section 5). The hyperparameters are reported with the results
in Table 1.
3.2.3. Neural network classiﬁer (Spectrogram-ResNet)
The ResNet architecture consists of four Dilated ResNet blocks.
Each block has a different kernel size (width height) and
number of ﬁlters: (240100) and8;(120200) and16;
(60100) and32;(3050)and64. This is followed by a
fully connected layer with 100 hidden nodes and ﬁnally a soft-
max layer. The architecture is described in detail in in [33].
The input of the ResNet consisted of spectrograms. Spec-
trograms are highly informative, high dimensional features,
which capture most properties of the raw speech signals. They
are widely used with neural network backends [35, 34]. The in-
put spectrograms were zero padded to the length of the longest
utterance so that even the longest utterance could be processed
by the network. The network was trained for 50 epochs in
Keras [36], selecting the model with the best validation loss af-
ter training. We used the Adam optimiser with a learning rate
of= 0:001[37]. To avoid overﬁtting on the test material, no
hyperparameter optimisation was performed (see Section 5).
Table 1: Equal error rates (EER) and accuracy of the classiﬁers with different feature and classiﬁer combinations. Higher accuracy
and lower EER is better. Best performances are emphasised in bold.
GMM PLP LTAS PPG Pitch MFCC Spectrogram-ResNet
Train set accuracy 97.80% 94.71% 85.24% 52.04% 97.02% 98.58%
Train set EER 1.34% 5.3% 11.56% 39.07% 2.05% 1.00%
Test set accuracy 77.52% 65.59% 72.89% 43.57% 76.83% 88.37 %
Test set EER 22.01% 31.05% 29.33% 45.65% 20.62% 9.85%
m 8 10 10 16 8 N/A
LASSO PLP LTAS PPG Pitch MFCC -
Train set accuracy 85.46% 98.55% 80.59% 70.22% 87.02% -
Train set EER 9.25% 1.45% 12.25% 29.03% 8.01% -
Test set accuracy 80.19% 87.37% 73.35% 58.86% 80.88% -
Test set EER 20.62% 10.67% 25.84% 37.32% 19.23% -
 0.0001 0.01 0.001 0.001 0.01 -
4. Results and analysis
4.1. Results on training and test set
The detection accuracies for the training and test sets are mea-
sured using accuracy and equal error rate (EER), and can be
seen in Table 1. Chance level accuracy for the test set is 57.82%.
mrefers to the number of Gaussian mixture components used
during GMM training. refers to the sparsity inducing hyper-
parameter of LASSO, a larger indicates a sparser model.
The Spectrogram-ResNet-based detector achieved the best
classiﬁcation performance both in terms of accuracy and EER.
This is closely followed by the LTAS-LASSO model. The su-
periority of the ResNet over the other methods is likely due to
the ResNet seeing the whole utterance at once unlike the other
methods. LASSO backends always outperformed the GMM-
based backends on the test set, which is especially striking on
the LTAS-based features. One possible explanation for the per-
formance difference might be the collinearity of certain features
as LASSO is known to handle collinearity better. We can see
that for non-collinear features like MFCC or PLP the perfor-
mance difference between LASSO and the GMMs is marginal.
The worst performance was achieved by the Pitch features,
which is close to chance level for both backends. This indicates
that Pitch features are not appropriate for oral cancer speech
detection, suggesting that oral cancer speech indeed is impaired
primarily on the articulation level [3].
4.2. Analysis of the differences between oral cancer speech
and healthy speech
To investigate the differences between oral cancer speech
and healthy speech the two best performing architectures
(Spectrogram-ResNET, LTAS-LASSO) and PPG-GMM were
analysed through the information in the speech signal that was
used by these models to distinguish oral cancer speech from
healthy speech. While the PPG-GMM does not stand out in
terms of accuracy, it lends itself to easy interpretation of the
acoustic information used for the task.
4.2.1. Analysis of the Spectrogram-ResNet detector
To investigate what information the ResNet classiﬁer uses to
distinguish between oral cancer speech and healthy speech, we
look at what parts of the spectrogram change the classiﬁcation
results the most.
To ﬁnd these salient parts of the spectrogram, we calculate
mean class activation maps, which indicate what frequencies are
the most important for detection of both classes, for each sample
in our test set as follows: Given a spectrogram image and a class
label (oral cancer speech/healthy speech) as input, we pass the
Figure 1: Mean class activation maps for healthy speech (top
panel) and oral cancer speech (bottom panel).
image through the ResNet to obtain the raw class scores before
softmax. The gradients are set to zero for all classes except
the desired class (i.e., oral cancer speech), which is set to 1.
This signal is then backpropagated to the rectiﬁed convolutional
feature map of interest [38]. We used the implementation from
thekeras-vis library.
Figure 1 shows the mean class activation maps for healthy
speech and oral cancer speech. For healthy speech (top panel),
the neural network spreads its focus (indicated by the coloured
bands where red means higher intensity) among all the fre-
quency bands. For oral cancer speech (bottom panel), the ma-
jority of the acoustic energy lies above the 4 kHz band. This
indicates that sibilant frequencies, which are above 4 kHz [39],
might be important for distinguishing between oral cancer and
healthy speech. This is in agreement with previous studies who
name sibilants as impaired sounds [8].
4.2.2. Analysis of the PPG-GMM detector
The trained GMM models can be viewed as models of a global
oral cancer speaker and a global healthy speaker. The mean pa-
rameters of the GMMs can inform us what features are more
typical for oral cancer speakers and which for healthy speakers
by constructing a difference model. First, we calculate the dif-
ference of the mixture components in the two GMMs, obtaining
ad2Rmdifference vector for each phone. Taking the mean of
d, we are able to obtain a signed scalar p2Rfor each phone
class. Ifpis positive it means that there is a higher likelihood
of occurrence of that phone in oral cancer speech compared to
healthy speech. If pis negative it means that the likelihood of
that phone is lower in oral cancer speakers – meaning that they
have trouble pronouncing that phone.
0.01
 0.00 0.01
mean difference of GMM binstwiykdahaynrvowehhhaeerf more cancer like
more control likeFigure 2: Mean difference of GMM bins (p)of the PPG-GMM
architecture.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000
frequency (Hz)0.1
0.00.1coefficient for frequency binmean LTAS features
std LTAS features
Figure 3: Learned coefﬁcients of the LTAS-LASSO.
Figure 2 shows the results for the phones with absolute
mean differences larger than 0.005. The blue bars indicate
phones that are more often present in healthy speech and the
red bars indicate phones that are more typical of cancer speak-
ers. We can see that /t/, /w/, /iy/, /k/ and /d/ have lower likeli-
hoods, indicating that some stop consonants are challenging for
oral cancer speakers. This is in agreement with [6, 7].
4.2.3. Analysis of the LTAS-LASSO based detector
LASSO-based models can be analysed using the coefﬁcients
of regression. A positive coefﬁcient indicates a feature con-
tributing to the cancer class and vice versa. Figure 3 shows the
learned coefﬁcients. The blue line shows the mean coefﬁcients,
the orange line shows the standard deviation coefﬁcients of the
LTAS. Knowing that neighbouring frequencies are discouraged
(because they provide similar (collinear) information), it is still
surprising that some frequency bands have several adjacent pos-
itive/negative coefﬁcients (clusters, shown as adjacent spikes).
These clusters indicate that a greater level of frequency resolu-
tion is needed for that particular frequency band. We can see
that for oral cancer speech this is the 3-4 kHz, indicating that
sibilant frequencies need greater frequency resolution.
5. General discussion
The paper presents the ﬁrst baseline models for the task of
healthy vs. oral cancer speech classiﬁcation. The Spectrogram-
ResNet classiﬁer achieved a high classiﬁcation accuracy and
outperformed all other models. A preliminary analysis of the
three models indicated that sibilant frequencies, and stop con-
sonant phones are the most decisive in the classiﬁcation.
The current study used healthy speech from the V oxCelebdataset, which only contains recordings from celebrities. Al-
though potentially the detectors could use other features than
those related to the acoustic characteristics of the speech for
classiﬁcation, this is not likely: inspection of the recognition
results of the individual speakers in both datasets showed that
in both datasets some speakers are well classiﬁed whereas oth-
ers are not (range oral cancer speech: 49.7% – 100.0%; range
healthy speech: 34.8% – 94.4% on the test set), although on
average the oral cancer speakers were better classiﬁed than the
healthy speakers: 89.6% vs. 66.2%.
Because of our relatively small-sized datasets, we kept hy-
perparameter tuning to a minimum to avoid overﬁtting on the
test set. The more traditional methods (GMM and LASSO)
only have a single hyperparameter, so chances of overﬁtting to
the test set are small. Neural networks, on the other hand, usu-
ally have a myriad of hyperparameters, which makes overﬁtting
more likely. To avoid this, we refrained from using any tuning
mechanisms at all with the neural networks.
6. Conclusion
We presented a brand new dataset for analysis of spontaneous
oral cancer speech, and showed that a detector based on ResNet
taking spectrograms as input had a high performance in distin-
guishing between oral cancer speech and healthy speech, and
generalised well to unseen data. Analysis of the speech signals
through the classiﬁers shows that sibilants and stop consonants
are important for oral cancer speech detection, while no evi-
dence has been found on the importance of vowels and diph-
thongs.
7. Acknowledgements
This project has received funding from the European Unions
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under Marie
Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 766287. The Depart-
ment of Head and Neck Oncology and surgery of the Nether-
lands Cancer Institute receives a research grant from Atos Med-
ical (H ¨orby, Sweden), which contributes to the existing infras-
tructure for quality of life research.
8. References
[1] Kevin D Shield, Jacques Ferlay, Ahmedin Jemal, Rengaswamy
Sankaranarayanan, Anil K Chaturvedi, Freddie Bray, and Isabelle
Soerjomataram, “The global incidence of lip, oral cavity, and
pharyngeal cancers by subsite in 2012,” CA: a cancer journal for
clinicians , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 51–64, 2017.
[2] J B Epstein, S Emerton, D A Kolbinson, N D Le, N Phillips,
P Stevenson-Moore, and D Osoba, “Quality of life and oral func-
tion following radiotherapy for head and neck cancer.,” Head
Neck , 1999.
[3] Elizabeth C Ward and Corina J van As-Brooks, Head and
neck cancer: treatment, rehabilitation, and outcomes. Chapter 5:
Speech and Swallowing Following Oral, Oropharyngeal, and Na-
sopharyngeal Cancer , Plural Publishing, 2014.
[4] Jeri A Logemann, Barbara Roa Pauloski, Alfred W Rademaker,
and Laura A Colangelo, “Speech and swallowing rehabilitation
for head and neck cancer patients,” Oncology , vol. 11, no. 5,
1997.
[5] KDR Kappert, MJA van Alphen, LE Smeele, AJM Balm, and
F van der Heijden, “Quantiﬁcation of tongue mobility impairment
using optical tracking in patients after receiving primary surgery
or chemoradiation,” PloS one , vol. 14, no. 8, 2019.
[6] Tim Bressmann, Hannah Jacobs, Janette Quintero, and Jonathan C
Irish, “Speech outcomes for partial glossectomy surgery: Mea-
sures of speech articulation and listener perception indicateurs de
la parole pour une glossectomie partielle: Mesures de larticula-
tion de la parole et de la perception des auditeurs,” Head and
Neck Cancer , vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 204, 2009.
[7] Tim Bressmann, Robert Sader, Tara L Whitehill, and Nabil Sam-
man, “Consonant intelligibility and tongue motility in patients
with partial glossectomy,” Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery , vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 298–303, 2004.
[8] Juha-Pertti Laaksonen, Jana Rieger, Jeffrey Harris, and Hadi
Seikaly, “A longitudinal acoustic study of the effects of the radial
forearm free ﬂap reconstruction on sibilants produced by tongue
cancer patients,” Clinical linguistics & phonetics , vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 253–264, 2011.
[9] Juha-Pertti Laaksonen, Jana Rieger, Risto-Pekka Happonen, Jef-
frey Harris, and Hadi Seikaly, “Speech after radial forearm free
ﬂap reconstruction of the tongue: a longitudinal acoustic study of
vowel and diphthong sounds,” Clinical linguistics & phonetics ,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 41–54, 2010.
[10] Marieke J De Bruijn, Louis Ten Bosch, Dirk J Kuik, Hugo Quen ´e,
Johannes A Langendijk, C Ren ´e Leemans, and Irma M Verdonck-
de Leeuw, “Objective acoustic-phonetic speech analysis in pa-
tients treated for oral or oropharyngeal cancer,” Folia Phoniatrica
et Logopaedica , vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 180–187, 2009.
[11] Calvin Thomas, Vlado Keselj, Nick Cercone, Kenneth Rock-
wood, and Elissa Asp, “Automatic detection and rating of de-
mentia of alzheimer type through lexical analysis of spontaneous
speech,” in IEEE International Conference Mechatronics and Au-
tomation, 2005 . IEEE, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1569–1574.
[12] M. Windrich, A. Maier, R. Kohler, E. Nth, E. Nkenke, U. Eysh-
oldt, and M. Schuster, “Automatic quantiﬁcation of speech in-
telligibility of adults with oral squamous cell carcinoma,” Folia
Phoniatrica et Logopaedica , vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 151–6, 2009.
[13] Andreas Maier, Elmar N ¨oth, Anton Batliner, Emeka Nkenke, and
Maria Schuster, “Fully automatic assessment of speech of chil-
dren with cleft lip and palate,” Informatica , vol. 30, no. 4, 2006.
[14] Florian Eyben and Bj ¨orn Schuller, “opensmile:) the munich open-
source large-scale multimedia feature extractor,” ACM SIGMulti-
media Records , vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 4–13, 2015.
[15] Daniel Povey, Arnab Ghoshal, Gilles Boulianne, Lukas Bur-
get, Ondrej Glembek, Nagendra Goel, Mirko Hannemann, Petr
Motlicek, Yanmin Qian, Petr Schwarz, et al., “The kaldi speech
recognition toolkit,” in IEEE 2011 workshop on automatic speech
recognition and understanding . IEEE Signal Processing Society,
2011.
[16] Brian McFee, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel PW Ellis, Matt
McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and Oriol Nieto, “librosa: Audio and
music signal analysis in python,” in Proceedings of the 14th
python in science conference , 2015, vol. 8.
[17] Philipp Klumpp, Julian Fritsch, and Elmar N ¨oth, “Ann-based
alzheimer’s disease classiﬁcation from bag of words,” in Speech
Communication; 13th ITG-Symposium . VDE, 2018, pp. 1–4.
[18] Alireza A Dibazar, S Narayanan, and Theodore W Berger, “Fea-
ture analysis for automatic detection of pathological speech,” in
Proceedings of the Second Joint 24th Annual Conference and
the Annual Fall Meeting of the Biomedical Engineering Soci-
ety][Engineering in Medicine and Biology . IEEE, 2002, vol. 1,
pp. 182–183.
[19] Tobias Bocklet, Andreas Maier, Josef G Bauer, Felix Burkhardt,
and Elmar Noth, “Age and gender recognition for telephone appli-
cations based on gmm supervectors and support vector machines,”
inICASSP . IEEE, 2008, pp. 1605–1608.
[20] Cassia Valentini-Botinhao, Sabine Degenkolb-Weyers, Andreas
Maier, Elmar N ¨oth, Ulrich Eysholdt, and Tobias Bocklet, “Au-
tomatic detection of sigmatism in children,” in Third Workshop
on Child, Computer and Interaction , 2012.
[21] Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman, “V ox-
celeb: A large-scale speaker identiﬁcation dataset,” in Inter-
speech , 2017, pp. 2616–2620.[22] Lindsey K. Smith and Alexander M. Goberman, “Long-time av-
erage spectrum in individuals with Parkinson disease,” NeuroRe-
habilitation , 2014.
[23] Suely Master, Noemi De Biase, Vanessa Pedrosa, and
Bras´ılia Maria Chiari, “The long-term average spectrum in re-
search and in the clinical practice of speech therapists,” Pro-fono
: revista de atualizacao cientiﬁca , 2006.
[24] Kristine Tanner, Nelson Roy, Andrea Ash, and Eugene H. Buder,
“Spectral moments of the long-term average spectrum: Sensitive
indices of voice change after therapy?,” Journal of Voice , 2005.
[25] Gunnar Fant, “The source ﬁlter concept in voice production,”
STL-QPSR , vol. 1, no. 1981, pp. 21–37, 1981.
[26] Hynek Hermansky, “Perceptual linear predictive (plp) analysis of
speech,” the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America , vol. 87,
no. 4, pp. 1738–1752, 1990.
[27] Pegah Ghahremani, Bagher BabaAli, Daniel Povey, Korbinian
Riedhammer, Jan Trmal, and Sanjeev Khudanpur, “A pitch ex-
traction algorithm tuned for automatic speech recognition,” in
ICASSP . IEEE, 2014, pp. 2494–2498.
[28] Vassil Panayotov, Guoguo Chen, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khu-
danpur, “Librispeech: an asr corpus based on public domain audio
books,” in ICASSP . IEEE, 2015, pp. 5206–5210.
[29] Guanlong Zhao, Shaojin Ding, and Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna,
“Foreign accent conversion by synthesizing speech from phonetic
posteriorgrams,” in Interspeech , 2019, pp. 2843–2847.
[30] Robert Tibshirani, “Regression shrinkage and selection via the
lasso,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Method-
ological) , vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 267–288, 1996.
[31] Lars Buitinck, Gilles Louppe, Mathieu Blondel, Fabian Pe-
dregosa, Andreas Mueller, Olivier Grisel, Vlad Niculae, Peter
Prettenhofer, Alexandre Gramfort, Jaques Grobler, Robert Lay-
ton, Jake VanderPlas, Arnaud Joly, Brian Holt, and Ga ¨el Varo-
quaux, “API design for machine learning software: experiences
from the scikit-learn project,” in ECML PKDD Workshop: Lan-
guages for Data Mining and Machine Learning , 2013, pp. 108–
122.
[32] Fisher Yu, Vladlen Koltun, and Thomas A. Funkhouser, “Dilated
residual networks,” CoRR , vol. abs/1705.09914, 2017.
[33] Bence Mark Halpern, Finnian Kelly, Rob Van Son, and Anil
Alexander, “Residual networks for resisting noise: analysis of
an embeddings-based spooﬁng countermeasure,” in Odyssey The
Speaker and Language Recognition Workshop , 2020.
[34] Cheng-I Lai, Nanxin Chen, Jes ´us Villalba, and Najim Dehak,
“ASSERT: Anti-Spooﬁng with Squeeze-Excitation and Residual
Networks,” in Interspeech , 2019, pp. 1013–1017.
[35] Jonathan Shen, Ruoming Pang, Ron J Weiss, Mike Schuster,
Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Zhifeng Chen, Yu Zhang, Yux-
uan Wang, Rj Skerrv-Ryan, et al., “Natural tts synthesis by con-
ditioning wavenet on mel spectrogram predictions,” in ICASSP .
IEEE, 2018, pp. 4779–4783.
[36] Franc ¸ois Chollet, “Keras: The Python Deep Learning library,”
Keras.Io , 2015.
[37] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba, “Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization,” in 3rd International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May
7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings , Yoshua Bengio and
Yann LeCun, Eds., 2015.
[38] Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ra-
makrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra, “Grad-
CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep Networks via Gradient-
Based Localization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision , 2017.
[39] Peter Ladefoged and Sandra Ferrari DIsner, Vowels and conso-
nants , Wiley & Blackwell, 2012.